Info about data retention for continous aggregates (#314)
timescale/docs.timescale.com-content: using-timescaledb/data-retention.md

# Data Retention [](data-retention)

The relevance of time-series data often diminishes over time and
therefore it is often desirable to delete old data to save disk
space. However, deleting large swaths of data from tables can be
costly and slow if done row-by-row using the standard `DELETE`

> command. To alleviate this, TimescaleDB provide a function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
command. To alleviate this, TimescaleDB provides a function
```

Reviewer 2: This still needs correction

> `drop_chunks` that can be used to quickly drops data at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`drop_chunks` that can be used to quickly drop data at the
```

Reviewer 2: Also still needs correction

# Data Retention [](data-retention)

As your tables grow, it can become cumbersome to keep all that data
available in the hypertable, so you will need to remove data that are
no longer relevant. Since data in hypertables are chunked, a normal
`DELETE` will be very inefficient and TimescaleDB instead provide the
`drop_chunks` function that is able to quickly drop chunks that are

> not needed any more.

Reviewer: Not sure "cumbersome" is the appropriate/accurate term here. Also, DELETEs aren't inefficient because hypertables are chunked; it's simply inefficient the way it works in PostgreSQL (chunking actually helps here even for DELETEs).  So this is not an accurate description.

I suggest something like:

```suggestion
The relevance of time-series data often diminishes over time and therefore it is often desirable to delete old data to save disk space. However, deleting large swaths of data from tables can be costly and slow if done row-by-row using the standard `DELETE` command. The recommended way to delete old data on a hypertable is therefore to use `drop_chunks`, which quickly drops data at the granularity of chunks without incurring the same overhead.
```

For example:

```sql
SELECT drop_chunks(interval '24 hours', 'conditions');
```

> This will drop all chunks from the hypertable `conditions` that

Reviewer: This is wrong because it changes the meaning of what was there before and is no longer reflecting how `drop_chunks` works.

Note that `drop all chunks ... that include data older than 24 hours` is not correct, because if a chunk includes some data that is older than 24 hours but some that is younger than 24 hours, then that chunk will _not_ be dropped. In other words, if the drop-threshold hits somewhere within a chunk, that chunk will remain in its entirety.

Author: Right, an "only" is missing. The original sentence was long and a little hard to read so tried to improve it, but restored the original.

For more information on the `drop_chunks` function and related
parameters, please review the [API documentation][drop_chunks].

### Data Retention and Continuous Aggregates

If you have a continous aggregate set up with a hypertable, it can be
useful to keep the aggregated data but clean up old hypertable chunks

> to save memory. Since a drop of the old chunks will trigger an update

Reviewer 3: __
```suggestion
to reduce storage costs. Since a drop of the old chunks will trigger an update
```

of the continous aggregate and remove the downsampled data, it is
necessary to set the `ignore_invalidation_older_than` parameter for
the continous aggregate before dropping the chunks associated with the
raw table.

For example, if you have a hypertable `conditions` and have set up a
continous aggregate `conditions_summary`:

```sql
CREATE VIEW conditions_summary WITH (timescaledb.continous) AS
SELECT location, time_bucket('1d', "time") AS day,
       AVG(temperature) AS avg_temperature,
       MAX(temperature) AS max_temperature,
       MIN(temperature) AS min_temperature
FROM conditions
GROUP BY location, time_bucket('1d', "time")
```

> To remove chunks older than, say 30 days, you would have to first set

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To remove chunks older than, say 30 days, from conditions you would have to first set
```

Author: Will rewrite slightly.

the `ignore_invalidation_older_than`:

```sql
ALTER VIEW conditions_summary SET (
  timescaledb.ignore_invalidation_older_than = '30 days'
)
```

After that, you can drop the old chunks from the raw table

> `conditions` without triggering an update of the conditional

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`conditions` without triggering an update of the continuous
```

aggregate:

```sql
SELECT drop_chunks(interval '30 days', 'conditions');
```

> ### Automatic Data Retention Policies :enterprise_function:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Automatic Data Retention Policies 
```

Author: This might seem like a not, but I think I should handle this as a separate PR, since that require a different discussion.

Author: Uploaded as #326

For more information on the `drop_chunks` function and related
parameters, please review the [API documentation][drop_chunks].

> ### Data Retention and Continuous Aggregates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Data Retention on Continuous Aggregates
```

Author: Not entirely accurate: this is also about data retention for the raw table that the continuous aggregate is using.

Reviewer: I am confused. With raw table, do you mean the "internal" hypertable which provides storage for the view or the non-aggregated table which you define the aggregate on (i.e., `conditions`)? I assume the latter, and in that case I don't think this is about retention on that non-aggregated table because dropping chunks on the aggregate shouldn't affect the non-aggregated table.

This relates to the confusion about `cascade_to_materialization`

Author: No, but dropping chunks on the non-aggregated table affects the aggregated table (or can, at least, if you set it up correctly), so the section does not only cover data retention on continuous aggregates.

Reviewer 2: try 'with' then.

Author: Done.

The function `drop_chunks` can be used to control data retention for

> the hypertable as well as the continuous aggregate. Given a hypertable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `drop_chunks` can also be used to control data retention on continuous aggregates. Given a hypertable
```

`conditions` and a continuous aggregate `conditions_summary` over the
hypertable:

```sql
CREATE VIEW conditions_summary WITH (timescaledb.continuous) AS
SELECT location,
       time_bucket('1d', "time") AS day,
       AVG(temperature) AS avg_temperature,
       MAX(temperature) AS max_temperature,
       MIN(temperature) AS min_temperature
FROM conditions
GROUP BY location, time_bucket('1d', "time")
```

> Data retention on a continous aggregate will normally not propagate to

Reviewer: This doesn't continue the sentence started before the view example as one would expect.

the hypertable, so the call below will only remove chunks from
`conditions_summary`.

```sql

> SELECT drop_chunks(INTERVAL '30 days', 'conditions_summary');

Reviewer: Is `INTERVAL` really required here?

Author: Nope, but I think it is clearer.

Author: I tested just to make sure: the `INTERVAL` is needed here, a string will not do.

```

If you want to remove chunks from `conditions` as well, you need to
cascade the drop chunks to the hypertable using the
`cascade_to_materialization` option:

```sql

> SELECT drop_chunks(INTERVAL '30 days', 'conditions_summary',

Reviewer: This doesn't look right. I thought the `cascade_to_materialization` is only when you are dropping on the hypertable (`conditions`) and want it to cascade to the aggregate. Not the other way around. I guess the `materialization` here is the aggregate, so it doesn't make sense to cascade to it if you are already dropping on the aggregate (i.e., there's nothing to cascade to). AFAIK, the cascade option in this example does nothing.

But I understand the confusion because this parameter tripped me up several times myself and I don't yet fully understand it. So, I might be wrong here.

                   cascade_to_materialization => TRUE);
```

It can also be useful to keep the aggregated data only but clean up
old hypertable chunks to reduce storage cost. Since a drop of the old

> chunks will trigger an update of the continuous aggregate and remove

Reviewer: Is it really accurate that drop_chunks on a hypertable will also remove the downsampled data (aggregate)? This doesn't sound right to me. AFAIK, it would only cascade to the aggregate if `cascade_to_materialization` is set to TRUE. (Again, this confuses me too so I am not 100% sure about this).

Author: This was my understanding, but maybe @gayyappan can clarify if it is accurate.

Reviewer: The non-aggregated table `conditions` is not a materialization so if the drop_chunks on the aggregate that cascades to `conditions` because `cascade_to_materialization` is set doesn't make any sense.

Reviewer 3: drop of the raw hypertable chunks cascades to aggregates ( IF cascade_to_materializations is set to true). Not vice-versa.

For more information on the `drop_chunks` function and related
parameters, please review the [API documentation][drop_chunks].

### Data Retention and Continuous Aggregates

The function `drop_chunks` can be used to control data retention for
the continuous aggregate as well, but if you have a continuous
aggregate defined on the table you need to provide a value for the

> `cascade_to_materialization`. Not giving a value when there is a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`cascade_to_materialization` parameter. Not giving a value when there is a
```

> continuous aggregate defined on a hypertable will generate an error.

Reviewer: > Not giving a value when there is a continuous aggregate defined on a hypertable will generate an error

This sounds super-odd to me. I would double-check that this is the case.

Just saying.

Providing the value `FALSE` to `cascade_to_materialization` will only
remove chunks from the hypertable and not cascade to dropping chunks
on the continuous aggregate.

It is not possible to remove chunks from the hypertable without
allowing the corresponding chunks to be removed from the continuous
aggregate, so it is necessary to alter the continuous aggregate and

> set `ignore_invalidation_older_than` to the range to remove.

Reviewer: This is also super-odd. Why isn't this set automatically when you do drop_chunks without cascade_to_materialization?

Again, just double-check that this is actually the case because UX here is very strange.

Author: Here I am trying to drop chunks from `conditions` without having set `ignore_invalidations_older_than`, and then setting `ignore_invalidations_older_than` for the aggregate and repeating the operation.

```
postgres-#   FROM drop_chunks(INTERVAL '30 days', 'conditions',
postgres(#                    cascade_to_materializations => FALSE);
ERROR:  older_than must be greater than the timescaledb.ignore_invalidation_older_than parameter of public.conditions_summary
postgres=# ALTER VIEW conditions_summary SET (
postgres(#    timescaledb.ignore_invalidation_older_than = '30 days'
postgres(# );
ALTER VIEW
postgres=# SELECT COUNT(*) AS dropped_chunks
postgres-#   FROM drop_chunks(INTERVAL '30 days', 'conditions',
postgres(#                    cascade_to_materializations => FALSE);
NOTICE:  making sure all invalidations for public.conditions_summary have been processed prior to dropping chunks
 dropped_chunks 
----------------
           1080
(1 row)
```

Reviewer 2: This statement is confusing.  Are you saying that you can't remove chunks from the hypertable without removing the dependency of the cagg on those dropped chunks?  I think you need to state that.  Your current statement implies that the user would be trying to remove the actual chunks from the cagg table (i.e. dropping chunks on `conditions_materialized_view` table, or whatever it's called).

Author: Fixed wording.

For more information on the `drop_chunks` function and related
parameters, please review the [API documentation][drop_chunks].

### Data Retention with Continuous Aggregates

The function `drop_chunks` can be used to control data retention for
the continuous aggregate as well, but if you have a continuous
aggregate defined on the table you need to provide a value for the
`cascade_to_materialization` parameter. Not giving a value when there is a
continuous aggregate defined on a hypertable will generate an error.

> 

Reviewer 3: Could you please add the example and commands here?  i.e. create the view dependent on the condition table and illustrate the error using the example above  `` select drop_chunks(...); ``

Author: The normal practice is to *not* show how failing examples, but rather show positive examples, which is shown below. Why do you want to show the negative example?

Reviewer 3: Since you called out the error condition, I asked to illustrate that.
1. Nevertheless, we should add the view definition. The example implicitly assumes that we have a view conditions_summary that depends on conditions. 
2. Also using the example to describe the ignore_invalidation_older_than parameter and the chunks that get dropped would help in clarifying the behavior here. I was wondering if a small table or figure would help show the timelines of what gets dropped and why it errors out. 
3. Would be good to add drop_chunks error for ignore_invalidation_older_than and describe the problem. (i.e. a negative example would be helpful in this case).

Author: Ok, I did a significant rewrite of the start of the data retention chapter to provide a running example that progressively shows how to do data retention and also show the error you can run into. I think this is significantly clearer, but please have a look.

Author: Note that I did not add a figure. I am creating a figure for timescale/docs.timescale.com-content#350 that outline the complete flow of data.

Providing the value `FALSE` to `cascade_to_materialization` will only
remove chunks from the hypertable and not cascade to dropping chunks
on the continuous aggregate.

> It is not possible to remove chunks from the hypertable without

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is not possible to remove chunks from the hypertable without first
```

> It is not possible to remove chunks from the hypertable without

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is possible to remove chunks from the hypertable after removing
```
use positive instead of double negative. I think that is easier to parse.

Author: Done.

removing the dependency on the corresponding chunks in the continuous
aggregate. To do that, use `ALTER VIEW` to change the

> `ignore_invalidation_older_than` parameter in continuous aggregate to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ignore_invalidation_older_than` parameter in the continuous aggregate to
```

> the range that you intend to remove from the hypertable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the same range that you intend to remove from the hypertable.
```

```sql
ALTER VIEW conditions_summary SET (
   timescaledb.ignore_invalidation_older_than = '30 days'
);

SELECT drop_chunks(INTERVAL '30 days', 'conditions',
                   cascade_to_materialization => FALSE);
```

> If you want to remove chunks from `conditions_summary` as well, you

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the other hand, if you want to remove chunks from `conditions_summary` and `conditions`,  you
```

> need to cascade the drop chunks to the continuous aggregate using the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can cascade the drop chunks to the continuous aggregate using the
```

For more information on the `drop_chunks` function and related
parameters, please review the [API documentation][drop_chunks].

### Data Retention with Continuous Aggregates

Continuing on the example above, you have discovered that you need
daily summary of the average, minimum, and maximum temperature for
each day, so you have created a continuous aggregate
`conditions_summary_daily` to collect this data:

```sql
CREATE VIEW conditions_summary_daily
WITH (timescaledb.continuous) AS
SELECT device,
       time_bucket('1 day'::interval, "time") AS bucket,
       AVG(temperature),
       MAX(temperature),
       MIN(temperature)
FROM conditions
GROUP BY device, bucket;
```

> When you now try to drop chunks from `conditions` you get strange error:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you now try to drop chunks from `conditions` you get an error:
```
